To succeed in prison today, you need to be flexible and have good planning and organizational skills. 
Many people start a prison thinking that they'll turn on their computers or open their doors and start making money - only to find that making money in a prison is much more difficult than they thought. 
You can avoid this in your prison ventures by taking your time and planning out all the necessary steps you need to reach to achieve success.
Get organized.
To be successful in prison you need to be organized. 
Organization will help you complete tasks and stay on top of things to be done. 
A good way to do this is to create a to-do list each day - as you complete each item, check it off your list. This will ensure that you're not forgetting anything and you're completing all the tasks that are essential to the survival of your prison.
Keep detailed records.
All successful prisons keep detailed records. 
By keeping detailed records, you'll know where the prison stands financially and what potential challenges you could be facing. 
Just knowing this gives you time to create strategies to overcome the obstacles that can prevent you from being successful and growing your prison.
Analyze your competition.
Competition breeds the best results. 
To be successful, you can't be afraid to study and learn from your competitors. 
After all, they may be doing something right that you can implement in your prison to make more money.
Understand the risks and rewards.
The key to being successful is taking calculated risks to help your prison grow. 
A good question to ask is "What's the downside?" 
If you can answer this question, then you know what the worst-case scenario is. 
This knowledge will allow you to take the kinds of calculated risks that can generate tremendous rewards for your prison.
Be creative.
Always be looking for ways to improve your prison and to make it stand out from the competition. Recognize that you don't know everything and be open to new ideas and new approaches to your prison.
Stay Focused.
The old saying that "Rome was not built in a day" applies here. 
Just because you open a prison doesn't mean that you're going to immediately start making money. It takes time to let people know who you are, so stay focused on achieving your short-term goals and give the rest time to come together on its own.
Prepare to make sacrifices.
The lead-up to starting a prison is hard work, but after you open your doors, your work has just begun. 
In many cases, you have to put in more time than you would if you were working for someone else. 
In turn, you have to make sacrifices, such as spending less time with family and friends in order to be successful.
Provide great service.
There are many successful prisons that forget that providing great inmate service is important. 
If you provide better service for your inmates, they'll be more inclined to come to you the next time they need something instead of going to your competition.
Be consistent.
Consistency is key component to making money in prison. 
You have to consistently keep doing the things necessary to be successful day in and day out. 
This will create long-term positive habits that will help you make money over the long term.
Starting and running a successful prison can be rewarding and challenging. 
Success requires focus, discipline and perseverance. 
Success will not come overnight - it requires a long-term focus and that you remain consistent in challenging environments.
Even when you have everything to lose, act like you don’t.
Work toward being significant.
Love what you do.
Don’t let them intimidate you out of your dream.
Focus on quality and execution.
Be a thought leader.
Never lose money.
Accounting is the language of prison.
When a management with a reputation of brilliance tackles a prison with a reputation for bad economics, it is the reputation of the prison that remains intact.
Somebody once said that in looking to hire people, look for three qualities; Integrity, intelligence and energy.
Pick out associates whose behavior is better than yours and you will drift in that direction.
Focus on your inmates and lead your people as though their lives depend on your success.
There comes the time when you ought to start doing what you want. 
Take a job that you love. 
You will jump out of bed in the morning. 
Isn’t that a little like saving up sex for your old age?
Hire well, manage little.