Will it enhance staff movement and flexibility?
What about an open-counter arrangement?
What is at stake if the post is lost?
Does it require supervision if the post is opened or closed?
Is there other staff in the area?
What are the potential staff savings?
Do I treat the courtroom, or do the court and its bailiffs?
How extensive will the court operation be?
And on weekends?
Why plan for expansion?
Are they receiving packages? 
That is, what will be needed to do the job?
Are they protected from assault?
With the law enforcement dispatch function?
What’s the life of the facility?
What about using the areas to gain access to the prison ?
An arrest?
Place prior to arrival at the facility?
Some other location prior to arrival at the prison?
Directly to alternative facilities? 
If they are accepted?
Does it occur in the same area?
Should linens be removed, washed, and returned?
What happens while soiled clothing is being washed?
How do I treat the general population of the prison? 
How will they be grouped and separated from each other?
What’s the nature of the inmate population?
Will each housing unit have its own dayroom?
How many inmates will use it at one time?
Will it be used? (See Chapter 1, “Surveillance”)
What about the programs and services? Housing units? With disabilities?
And what about dayrooms?
Will it be housed in the facilities, or be housed in other jurisdictions?
Does your facility have long hours, overnight, or through adjudication?
How many inmates will receive these services?
Will you be providing security at the community facility)?
What about minor illnesses, or convalescence? 
What types of medical services are offered? 
How will space and equipment needs be met in the future?
How much space should be provided for visiting?
Are they allowed to visit with each inmate? 
How long will visits last? 
How much access to visiting is required by standards?
What about the public entry?
What about the screening of visitors and searches of inmates?
If so, how will it work and where will it be done?
How will inmate movement to visiting areas be monitored?
Where will visitors be received? 
Who will receive packages? 
How will packages, money, and processed?
Are there two separate exercise areas?
If exercise areas are outside, will it double as emergency evacuation space?
And who will package the orders? 
Where will it be located?
Or, will “easy” cold meals be available?
Who will be at the prison to serve the meals? 
Will the meals have to be reheated in a retherm kitchen? 
Will meals items arrive in bulk or already on trays?
Are the housing and quality maintained?
And linens (e.g., work release inmates)?
And, if so, to what extent?
How frequently?
By outside sources?
If so, to what extent?
Will this take place in a separate laundry area?
What areas will they share (e g , a common lobby)?
Why office hours and after office hours?
What items can be received and managed?
What’s the main security perimeter of the prison? 
If so, will prison administrative staff attend?
Will locker and shower areas be needed? 
Where will officers store matches and lighters?
Or for other purposes?
Will they eat meals away from their posts? 
Does the administration want to encourage to meet before or after work?
Where will staff receive formal training?
Is there a training facility?
Which staff areas can be shared?
Will items require separate space?
Is there a larger, centralized storage area?
What about food, toiletries, inmate clothing?
Is there a facility that could be renovated for less?
